Presentation/Article/EcosysMetricsGOM.md, before:

# Global fishery imports and Eutrophication: synergistic effects on community dynamics (temporary)
**K.M. Purcell**, J.K. Craig
Beaufort Laboratory.  
National Marine Fisheries Service.   
Beaufort, NC, USA.  
[kevin@kevin.purcell.com](mailto:kevin@kevin-purcell.com)

RH: Fish imports eutrophication effects community dynamics	

## Abstract 
(words target)



 
##Introduction: (5 paragraphs)
Paragraph One
Introduce some large theoretical frame work for ecosystem response to disturbance.  Not hysteresis but improvement or maturation something.  

Effort trends and the relationship with global shrimp imports

Paragraph Two
There are three mechanisms driving disturbance within the northwestern Gulf of Mexico: eutrophication, commercial fishing harvest, especially shrimp trawling which has a significant impact on the demersal fish assemblages, and finally coastal marsh loss.  Two of these three primary disturbance mechanisms, eutrophication and harvest, have a disproportionately strong effect on the demersal fish community through coastal hypoxia and physical stress of harvest.  

Paragraph Three
Introduce community level effects of hypoxia and fishing, and introduce metrics used to calculate them in an evaluation framework.

Paragraph Four
Paragraph 5 (Questions)
The objective of this study was to evaluate spatial and temporal variation in community diversity metrics within the northwestern Gulf of Mexico.  The nwGOM is a highly disturbed environment experiencing eutrophication, intense patterns of harvest over the last 30 years.  










## Methods
### Data Sets:
The SEAMAP survey is a fishery-independent trawl and hydrographic survey that has been conducted semi-annually in the northwestern Gulf  (-88 to -97.3 longitutde and 3-100 m depth) since 1987.  Bottom environmental conditions (e.g., temperatures, salinity, dissolved oxygen, depth) are measured at point locations chosen based on a stratified random sampling design using a conductivity, temperature, depth profiler (CTD).

The Southeast Area Monitoring and Assessment Program (SEAMAP) survey is a hydrographic trawl survey which has been conducted in the northwestern Gulf of Mexico (Gulf) (-88 to -97.3 longitutde and 3-100 m depth) since 1982 and has operated in a standardized format since 1987 [@eldridge1988southeast].  The survey collects environmental (e.g., temperatures, salinity, dissolved oxygen, depth) and biological data (e.g., species presence, abundance) at point locations chosen based on a stratified random sampling design.  In the 31 years the SEAMAP survey has operated it has utilized 2261 unique taxonomic entities representing 747 genus and 1341 species.  To more manageably examine the diversity and dynamics of this marine community we evaluated a list of 60 species and 4 genus which represent ~90% of the total sampled biomass over 25 years (1987-2011) of the SEAMAP survey.  To avoid the systematic size bias derived from a biomass metric our list was created by examining the cumulative biomass contributions of all 2261 entities divided into three primary categories: pelagic, demersal and invertebrates.  From each of these three lists approximately 20 species were chosen from each representing 88% of demersal, 95% of pelagic and 97% of invertebrate sampled biomass.  By dividing the full list of taxonomically identified entities into these three categories and choosing representatives from each category we assured that our composite list of 4 genus and 60 species  was representative of both the overall environment sampled and the entirety of the biomass sampled by the SEAMAP survey.  The 4 independent genus designations (*Cynoscion*, *Loligo*, *Squilla*, *Solenocera*) were included due to their contribution to overall biomass and their prominent role as troublesome identification categories.  We examined only data post-1987 because prior to 1987 SEAMAP samplings methodologies are inconsistent in sampling time of day.  Additionally, our analysis only considers data for the northwestern Gulf of Mexico (west of -88), due to our interest in the relative contribution of hypoxia and fishing pressure on community dynamics and because this is the region of the Gulf most often effected by coastal hypoxia (XXXX).  While the SEAMAP database includes abundance and taxonomic specifics, additional species specific habitat occupancy (ie., pelagic, demersal) data was derived from FishBase (http://fishbase.org) [@froese2010fishbase]. 

To evaluate the relationship between community dynamics and the two primary offshore environmental disturbances (hypoxia, fishing pressure) within the northwestern Gulf region we employed data from both fishery-independent and dependent sources.  To quantify the effect of hypoxia we used data derived from the annual mid-summer shelf wide hydrographic survey cruise that has been conducted by Louisiana University Marine Consortium (LUMCON) since 1985.  A primary objective of the summer LUMCON cruise is to generate an estimate of the aerial extent of hypoxia in the northwestern Gulf during mid-summer (CITATION).  Fishing pressure, or more specifically, commercial shrimp trawling effort on the Louisiana and Texas coastal shelves were quantified using fishery landings data which are archived by the National Marine Fishery Service (NMFS) Galveston Laboratory, Texas.  This database is a fishery-dependent data set which is a summary of monthly landings and effort data for the Gulf of Mexico shrimp fishery.  Fishing effort data for the shrimp fishery is not measured directly but is estimated, based on non-random interviews conducted by NMFS port agents.  We utilized annual aggregated fishing effort along both the Louisiana and Texas shelves as a covariate and potential driver in the temporal dynamics of community dynamics.  

### Breakpoint Analysis
Our first effort was to examine the temporal dynamics in the annual estimates of both abundance and biomass of our 64 selected taxonomic groups and compare those dynamics to the two primary offshore environmental disturbances within the northwestern Gulf.  We used a breakpoint analysis to identify important temporal changes along the 25 year time series used within this analysis.  Breakpoint analysis employs piecewise regression, or "broken-stick", models to iteratively fit a series of regression models, and can be utilized to identify critical thresholds (CITS) or important change-points within a time series (XXXX).  Our analysis employed a single sharp-break linear regression approach, which identified an ideal breakpoint for each time series by iteratively fitting a series of piecewise models with possible breakpoints ranging from 1990-2010.  Optimal models were selected based on which model had the lowest mean square error (MSE).  

### Abundance Matrix:
Abundance and biomass are clear markers of disturbance or regime change in most aquatic environments (CITATIONS).  However, due to the nature and environmental impacts of a traditional trawl fishery mean that not only are fishery target species effected but often much of the available demersal biomass is effected as well.  Bycatch within a Gulf trawl fishery is of growing concern, so much as to be mandated for examination by the Magnuson IMPORTANCE OF BYCATCH  

To evaluate annual patterns of abundance with respect to bycatch status we classified each of our 64 taxonomic entities according to the nature of their bycatch relationship within the Gulf shrimp trawl fishery.  A recent study of observer data for both the South Atlantic and the US Gulf of Mexico Penaeid shrimp fisheries (Scott-Denton et al. 2012 Marine Fisheries Review) used observer data from > 10000 individual tows and approximately ~5200 sea days to characterize bycatch within the fishery.  We classified each of our taxonomic groups into one of four bycatch categories (target, high, rare, never) based on the proportion of biomass that species or group contributed to total bycatch biomass within the study.  The three species (F. aztecus, L. setiferus, F. duorarum) which are primary targets of the shrimp fishery in the northwestern Gulf were identified as TARGET species, within the HIGH group were any taxonomic entities represented by ≥ 0.1 percent of total biomass in the study, groups with the RARE designation consisted of \*<\* 0.1 percent of the total biomass, and finally the NEVER category consisted of species which were part of our taxonomic entities but were absent from bycatch characterization samples in the study.  To visualize these relationships we utilized the mvtsplot R package (Peng 2008) to create a 4 panel matrix plot in which high abundance is represented by green and low abundance is red, each time series is color metrically independent, and each panel represents a different category of bycatch association.  

### Community metrics:

Under the framework of ecosystem based management a number of studies have examined the correlation between metrics of community composition and a wide array of ecosystem disturbance regiems [@Fulton2005which; @rochet2010changes; @rice2000evaluating; Link citations etc].  We chose four univariate metrics of composition metrics to describe and examine patterns of temporal variation within the northwestern Gulf demersal nekton community.  We calculated a 25 year time-series for Margalef's index (*D*), Pielou's eveness (*J*), and two of Hill's numbers *N1* and *N2* based on SEAMAP abundance data for our 64 taxonimc entities.  Using the methods outlined above we developed a broken-stick regression model for each community time-series and determined a break point in the time series based on the lowest MSE.  

### Pelagic to Demersal Ratio:
The proportion of pelagic relative to demersal biomass in fishery landings is considered a metric sensitive to eutrophication (Caddy 1993, de Leiva Moreno et al 2000, Hodorp et al. 2010).  Conceptually, the P:D ratio is derived from the differential response of fishery stocks to increased nutrients within a system (Caddy et al. 1998 via Hondorp).  More specifically in partially enclosed systems eutrophication will tend to degrade benthic habitat resulting in decreased demersal landings and elevated pelagic-demersal ratios (Hondorp et al 2010).  Previous studies have found positive correlations between P:D ratio and chlorophyll-a concentrations within systems in both in Europe and the Mediterranean (Caddy 2000, de Leiva Moreno et al 2000).  Additionally, a recent study by Hondorp et al (2010) examined landings composition and water quality data for 22 different ecosystems including estuaries, coastal seas, and semi-enclosed basins.  While Hondorp et al (2010) reported indications that fishery practices (gear) and management could affect patterns of landings composition, they found that systems with extensive eutrophication and hypoxia displayed high P:D ratios.  To evaluate the effect of annual hypoxia on community dynamics we examined temporal and spatial dynamics in P:D ratio within the northwestern Gulf.  Biomass data for the 64 sampled biomass time series were classified as either pelagic or demersal based on species specific habitat occupancy.  The annual P:D ratios were calculated as the quotient of the annual aggregated pelagic and demersal biomasses for all survey stations summed across both the Louisiana and Texas shelves.  We also calculated the P:D ratio as a shelfwide metric including all stations for the entire northwestern Gulf.  

### Abundance Biomass Comparison (ABC) curves:
The application of Abundance Biomass Comparison (ABC) curves to the study of disturbance within an ecosystem has an established history within marine benthic systems [@warwick1986an]), especially with respect to pollution driven perturbations [@warwick1987detection;@warwick1994relearning].  ABC curves are a derivative of *k*-dominance curves [@lambshead1983detection via: @greenstreet1996fishing], the theoretical basis of which is derived from principles of intermediate disturbance hypothesis [@connell1978diversity] and r- and k-selection theory [@Pianka1970on] and has been previously reviewed (Warwick and Clarke 1994, Yemane et al. 2005).  Recently, the application of ABC cures analysis has been applied to the examination of fishing pressure and its impacts on fish assemblages (Bianchi et al 2001, Blanchard et al. 2004, DeMartini et al. 2008, Jouffre and Inejih 2005, Kaiser et al. 2000, @yemane2005exploring).  Specifically, ABC analysis involves the comparison of two superimposed *k*-dominance, or cumulative ranked, curves for both abundance and biomass within a system over a given time period (Clarke 1990).  The difference between the curves is calculated as the Warwick statistic (*W*) with negative values indicating a biomass curve that lies below the abundance curve, and represents relatively disturbed systems (Warwick 1986, @yemane2005exploring). 

In the northwestern Gulf fishing effort from the commercial shrimp fishery is widely distributed across both the Louisiana and Texas coastal shelves (Perhaps a supp figure).  To evaluate the impact of this effort on demersal fish assembledges we used SEAMAP survey data on both the abundance and biomass of our previously described 64 taxonomic groups and aggregated them spatially based on their location on either the Louisiana or Texas shelf.  The value of this spatial comparison lies in the difference between the perturbation mechanisms operating on the respective coastal shelves.  While fishing effort is a consistent feature across the two coastal shelves, hypoxia is predominately a condition found in Louisiana coastal waters with limited exceptions in the northern most waters of the Texas coastal shelf (Rabalais, Bianchi see SpatialEff_MS citations for the same statement).  Dominance curves were generated for each year of survey data (1987-2011) for both the Louisiana and Texas regions using the Dominance plot routines in the software package PRIMER v6 (Warwhick ??), and *W* statistics were derived from these curves for each year for the Louisiana and Texas shelves, repectively.  






## Results
### Review of biomass table descriptive stuff point to table 1
  
### Review of 4 panel graphic with abun biomass and our two driver, discuss break points  
  Examination of the temporal trends in biomass and abundance within our 64 taxonomic entities showed their highest values early in the survey, 1992 for biomass (Figure 1A) and 1987 for abundance (Figure 1B), with the lowest time-series values occuring in 2000 for both measures.  Both biomass and abundance display positive trends since 2000, with values in 2011 representing 75% and 56% of the highest recorded values for biomass and abudance, respectively.  Time-series values for our two ecosystem drivers, fishing effort and hypoxia, displayed contrasting temporal trends with fishing effort showing decline and hypoxia showing an overal increase across the period of observation (1987-2011).  Fishing effort was highest in 1987 at a value of 2.4 x 10^5^ and was relatively stable at values around 2.0 x 10^5^ until 2000 when we begin to observe declining shrimping effort with a precipitous decline in 2003 that culminates in a minimum value of 6.0 x 10^4^ in 2010, an approximately 75% reduction in fishing effort over 7 years (Figure 1C).  The area of hypoxia, a value reported annually by the summer LUMCON cruise, showed lower values early in the time-series with the average trend stabilizing at approximately 160,000 km^2^ in 1993 and remaining realtively stable but with considerble variability throughout the rest of the time-series.  

  Both ecosystem drivers displayed broken stick shape curves that suggested the ability to fit two distinct linear models to each time series.  We conducted a breakpoint analysis for both ecosystem drivers and detrimed that fishery effort was best modeled with a single break point in 2003 (model statistics) while area of hypoxia was best modeled with a break point in 1996 (model stats).    
  
  
### Discuss mosaic plot and trends in biomass.  contrast the four catch types
* highlight the changes in fishery targest relative to others
* discuss the differences between bycatch species and species no present in bycatch
### Diversity Metric Trends
* Show over all behavior of the curves
* discuss seasonal variations

### P:D ratio
* Describe overall trends
* Highlight regional comparisons
* Highlight temporal variation

### W stats
* Describe results
* highlight regional differences
* describe temporal trends

### Breakpoint analysis
* Introduce table
* highlight the stong correspondence of all indicators to the breakpoint period corresponding to release from fishing

### GAM Models???



## Discussion

Paragraph based on Paragraph from p 355 last one first column Hondorp et al2010

Commit message:

add results section on mosaic plot and biomass time series comparison

Presentation/Article/EcosysMetricsGOM.md, after:

# Global fishery imports and Eutrophication: synergistic effects on community dynamics (temporary)
**K.M. Purcell**, J.K. Craig
Beaufort Laboratory.  
National Marine Fisheries Service.   
Beaufort, NC, USA.  
[kevin@kevin.purcell.com](mailto:kevin@kevin-purcell.com)

RH: Fish imports eutrophication effects community dynamics	

## Abstract 
(words target)



 
##Introduction: (5 paragraphs)
Paragraph One
Introduce some large theoretical frame work for ecosystem response to disturbance.  Not hysteresis but improvement or maturation something.  

Effort trends and the relationship with global shrimp imports

Paragraph Two
There are three mechanisms driving disturbance within the northwestern Gulf of Mexico: eutrophication, commercial fishing harvest, especially shrimp trawling which has a significant impact on the demersal fish assemblages, and finally coastal marsh loss.  Two of these three primary disturbance mechanisms, eutrophication and harvest, have a disproportionately strong effect on the demersal fish community through coastal hypoxia and physical stress of harvest.  

Paragraph Three
Introduce community level effects of hypoxia and fishing, and introduce metrics used to calculate them in an evaluation framework.

Paragraph Four
Paragraph 5 (Questions)
The objective of this study was to evaluate spatial and temporal variation in community diversity metrics within the northwestern Gulf of Mexico.  The nwGOM is a highly disturbed environment experiencing eutrophication, intense patterns of harvest over the last 30 years.  










## Methods
### Data Sets:
The SEAMAP survey is a fishery-independent trawl and hydrographic survey that has been conducted semi-annually in the northwestern Gulf  (-88 to -97.3 longitutde and 3-100 m depth) since 1987.  Bottom environmental conditions (e.g., temperatures, salinity, dissolved oxygen, depth) are measured at point locations chosen based on a stratified random sampling design using a conductivity, temperature, depth profiler (CTD).

The Southeast Area Monitoring and Assessment Program (SEAMAP) survey is a hydrographic trawl survey which has been conducted in the northwestern Gulf of Mexico (Gulf) (-88 to -97.3 longitutde and 3-100 m depth) since 1982 and has operated in a standardized format since 1987 [@eldridge1988southeast].  The survey collects environmental (e.g., temperatures, salinity, dissolved oxygen, depth) and biological data (e.g., species presence, abundance) at point locations chosen based on a stratified random sampling design.  In the 31 years the SEAMAP survey has operated it has utilized 2261 unique taxonomic entities representing 747 genus and 1341 species.  To more manageably examine the diversity and dynamics of this marine community we evaluated a list of 60 species and 4 genus which represent ~90% of the total sampled biomass over 25 years (1987-2011) of the SEAMAP survey.  To avoid the systematic size bias derived from a biomass metric our list was created by examining the cumulative biomass contributions of all 2261 entities divided into three primary categories: pelagic, demersal and invertebrates.  From each of these three lists approximately 20 species were chosen from each representing 88% of demersal, 95% of pelagic and 97% of invertebrate sampled biomass.  By dividing the full list of taxonomically identified entities into these three categories and choosing representatives from each category we assured that our composite list of 4 genus and 60 species  was representative of both the overall environment sampled and the entirety of the biomass sampled by the SEAMAP survey.  The 4 independent genus designations (*Cynoscion*, *Loligo*, *Squilla*, *Solenocera*) were included due to their contribution to overall biomass and their prominent role as troublesome identification categories.  We examined only data post-1987 because prior to 1987 SEAMAP samplings methodologies are inconsistent in sampling time of day.  Additionally, our analysis only considers data for the northwestern Gulf of Mexico (west of -88), due to our interest in the relative contribution of hypoxia and fishing pressure on community dynamics and because this is the region of the Gulf most often effected by coastal hypoxia (XXXX).  While the SEAMAP database includes abundance and taxonomic specifics, additional species specific habitat occupancy (ie., pelagic, demersal) data was derived from FishBase (http://fishbase.org) [@froese2010fishbase]. 

To evaluate the relationship between community dynamics and the two primary offshore environmental disturbances (hypoxia, fishing pressure) within the northwestern Gulf region we employed data from both fishery-independent and dependent sources.  To quantify the effect of hypoxia we used data derived from the annual mid-summer shelf wide hydrographic survey cruise that has been conducted by Louisiana University Marine Consortium (LUMCON) since 1985.  A primary objective of the summer LUMCON cruise is to generate an estimate of the aerial extent of hypoxia in the northwestern Gulf during mid-summer (CITATION).  Fishing pressure, or more specifically, commercial shrimp trawling effort on the Louisiana and Texas coastal shelves were quantified using fishery landings data which are archived by the National Marine Fishery Service (NMFS) Galveston Laboratory, Texas.  This database is a fishery-dependent data set which is a summary of monthly landings and effort data for the Gulf of Mexico shrimp fishery.  Fishing effort data for the shrimp fishery is not measured directly but is estimated, based on non-random interviews conducted by NMFS port agents.  We utilized annual aggregated fishing effort along both the Louisiana and Texas shelves as a covariate and potential driver in the temporal dynamics of community dynamics.  

### Breakpoint Analysis
Our first effort was to examine the temporal dynamics in the annual estimates of both abundance and biomass of our 64 selected taxonomic groups and compare those dynamics to the two primary offshore environmental disturbances within the northwestern Gulf.  We used a breakpoint analysis to identify important temporal changes along the 25 year time series used within this analysis.  Breakpoint analysis employs piecewise regression, or "broken-stick", models to iteratively fit a series of regression models, and can be utilized to identify critical thresholds (CITS) or important change-points within a time series (XXXX).  Our analysis employed a single sharp-break linear regression approach, which identified an ideal breakpoint for each time series by iteratively fitting a series of piecewise models with possible breakpoints ranging from 1990-2010.  Optimal models were selected based on which model had the lowest mean square error (MSE).  

### Abundance Matrix:
Abundance and biomass are clear markers of disturbance or regime change in most aquatic environments (CITATIONS).  However, due to the nature and environmental impacts of a traditional trawl fishery mean that not only are fishery target species effected but often much of the available demersal biomass is effected as well.  Bycatch within a Gulf trawl fishery is of growing concern, so much as to be mandated for examination by the Magnuson IMPORTANCE OF BYCATCH  

To evaluate annual patterns of abundance with respect to bycatch status we classified each of our 64 taxonomic entities according to the nature of their bycatch relationship within the Gulf shrimp trawl fishery.  A recent study of observer data for both the South Atlantic and the US Gulf of Mexico Penaeid shrimp fisheries (Scott-Denton et al. 2012 Marine Fisheries Review) used observer data from > 10000 individual tows and approximately ~5200 sea days to characterize bycatch within the fishery.  We classified each of our taxonomic groups into one of four bycatch categories (target, high, rare, never) based on the proportion of biomass that species or group contributed to total bycatch biomass within the study.  The three species (F. aztecus, L. setiferus, F. duorarum) which are primary targets of the shrimp fishery in the northwestern Gulf were identified as TARGET species, within the HIGH group were any taxonomic entities represented by ≥ 0.1 percent of total biomass in the study, groups with the RARE designation consisted of \*<\* 0.1 percent of the total biomass, and finally the NEVER category consisted of species which were part of our taxonomic entities but were absent from bycatch characterization samples in the study.  To visualize these relationships we utilized the mvtsplot R package (Peng 2008) to create a 4 panel matrix plot in which high abundance is represented by green and low abundance is red, each time series is color metrically independent, and each panel represents a different category of bycatch association.  

### Community metrics:

Under the framework of ecosystem based management a number of studies have examined the correlation between metrics of community composition and a wide array of ecosystem disturbance regiems [@Fulton2005which; @rochet2010changes; @rice2000evaluating; Link citations etc].  We chose four univariate metrics of composition metrics to describe and examine patterns of temporal variation within the northwestern Gulf demersal nekton community.  We calculated a 25 year time-series for Margalef's index (*D*), Pielou's eveness (*J*), and two of Hill's numbers *N1* and *N2* based on SEAMAP abundance data for our 64 taxonimc entities.  Using the methods outlined above we developed a broken-stick regression model for each community time-series and determined a break point in the time series based on the lowest MSE.  

### Pelagic to Demersal Ratio:
The proportion of pelagic relative to demersal biomass in fishery landings is considered a metric sensitive to eutrophication (Caddy 1993, de Leiva Moreno et al 2000, Hodorp et al. 2010).  Conceptually, the P:D ratio is derived from the differential response of fishery stocks to increased nutrients within a system (Caddy et al. 1998 via Hondorp).  More specifically in partially enclosed systems eutrophication will tend to degrade benthic habitat resulting in decreased demersal landings and elevated pelagic-demersal ratios (Hondorp et al 2010).  Previous studies have found positive correlations between P:D ratio and chlorophyll-a concentrations within systems in both in Europe and the Mediterranean (Caddy 2000, de Leiva Moreno et al 2000).  Additionally, a recent study by Hondorp et al (2010) examined landings composition and water quality data for 22 different ecosystems including estuaries, coastal seas, and semi-enclosed basins.  While Hondorp et al (2010) reported indications that fishery practices (gear) and management could affect patterns of landings composition, they found that systems with extensive eutrophication and hypoxia displayed high P:D ratios.  To evaluate the effect of annual hypoxia on community dynamics we examined temporal and spatial dynamics in P:D ratio within the northwestern Gulf.  Biomass data for the 64 sampled biomass time series were classified as either pelagic or demersal based on species specific habitat occupancy.  The annual P:D ratios were calculated as the quotient of the annual aggregated pelagic and demersal biomasses for all survey stations summed across both the Louisiana and Texas shelves.  We also calculated the P:D ratio as a shelfwide metric including all stations for the entire northwestern Gulf.  

### Abundance Biomass Comparison (ABC) curves:
The application of Abundance Biomass Comparison (ABC) curves to the study of disturbance within an ecosystem has an established history within marine benthic systems [@warwick1986an]), especially with respect to pollution driven perturbations [@warwick1987detection;@warwick1994relearning].  ABC curves are a derivative of *k*-dominance curves [@lambshead1983detection via: @greenstreet1996fishing], the theoretical basis of which is derived from principles of intermediate disturbance hypothesis [@connell1978diversity] and r- and k-selection theory [@Pianka1970on] and has been previously reviewed (Warwick and Clarke 1994, Yemane et al. 2005).  Recently, the application of ABC cures analysis has been applied to the examination of fishing pressure and its impacts on fish assemblages (Bianchi et al 2001, Blanchard et al. 2004, DeMartini et al. 2008, Jouffre and Inejih 2005, Kaiser et al. 2000, @yemane2005exploring).  Specifically, ABC analysis involves the comparison of two superimposed *k*-dominance, or cumulative ranked, curves for both abundance and biomass within a system over a given time period (Clarke 1990).  The difference between the curves is calculated as the Warwick statistic (*W*) with negative values indicating a biomass curve that lies below the abundance curve, and represents relatively disturbed systems (Warwick 1986, @yemane2005exploring). 

In the northwestern Gulf fishing effort from the commercial shrimp fishery is widely distributed across both the Louisiana and Texas coastal shelves (Perhaps a supp figure).  To evaluate the impact of this effort on demersal fish assembledges we used SEAMAP survey data on both the abundance and biomass of our previously described 64 taxonomic groups and aggregated them spatially based on their location on either the Louisiana or Texas shelf.  The value of this spatial comparison lies in the difference between the perturbation mechanisms operating on the respective coastal shelves.  While fishing effort is a consistent feature across the two coastal shelves, hypoxia is predominately a condition found in Louisiana coastal waters with limited exceptions in the northern most waters of the Texas coastal shelf (Rabalais, Bianchi see SpatialEff_MS citations for the same statement).  Dominance curves were generated for each year of survey data (1987-2011) for both the Louisiana and Texas regions using the Dominance plot routines in the software package PRIMER v6 (Warwhick ??), and *W* statistics were derived from these curves for each year for the Louisiana and Texas shelves, repectively.  






## Results
### Review of biomass table descriptive stuff point to table 1
  
### Review of 4 panel graphic with abun biomass and our two driver, discuss break points  
  Trends in biomass and abundance within our 64 taxonomic entities during the 27 years of data evaluated in this study showed their highest values early in the survey, 1992 for biomass (Figure 1A) and 1987 for abundance (Figure 1B), with the lowest time-series values occurring in 2000 for both measures.  Both biomass and abundance display positive trends since 2000, with values in 2011 representing 75% and 56% of the highest recorded values for biomass and abundance, respectively.  Time-series values for our two ecosystem drivers, fishing effort and hypoxia, displayed contrasting temporal trends with fishing effort showing decline and hypoxia showing an increase during the period of observation (1987-2011).  Fishing effort was highest in 1987 at a value of 2.4 x 10^5^ (days) and was relatively stable at values around 2.0 x 10^5^ (days) until 2000 when we begin to observe declining shrimping effort with a precipitous decline in 2003 that culminates in a minimum value of 6.0 x 10^4^ (days) in 2010, an approximately 75% reduction in fishing effort over 7 years (Figure 1C).  The area of hypoxia, a value estimated annually by the summer LUMCON cruise [@XXX], showed lower values early in the time-series with the average trend stabilizing at approximately 160,000 km^2^ in 1993 and remaining relatively stable, but with considerable inter-annual variability throughout the rest of the time-series.  

  Both ecosystem drivers displayed broken stick shape curves that suggested the ability to fit two distinct linear models to each time series.  We conducted a piecewise regression analysis for both ecosystem drivers and determined that fishery effort was best modeled with a single break point in 2003 (model statistics) while area of hypoxia was best modelled with a break point in 1996 (model stats).    
  
  
### Discuss mosaic plot and trends in biomass.  contrast the four catch types
* highlight the changes in fishery targest relative to others
To better understand to role of individual species or groups to the overall temporal variability of biomass within the northern Gulf we calculated a biomass time-series each of our 64 taxonomic entities.  Our individual times-series were grouped into four groups reflecting their relationship to the Gulf shirmp fishery.  This allows us to examine the variability of fishery target species relative to bycatch and species with which the fishery has little contact.  Of the four groups observed fishery targets consisted of XX% of survey biomass, with bycatch (XX) rare bycatch () and non-bycatch ().???  Our comparison found that for the three target species *P. aztecus*, *P. setiferus*, and * P. duorarum* biomass values were relatively low until 2003 (Figure 2A) at which point biomass values begin to increase for each of the three species.  The time-series for high-incidence bycatch species display an general pattern of decline with considerable inter-annual variability among the 16 taxonomic entities (Figure 2B).  The lowest biomass values for this group occur in the late 1990s until the early-2000s at which time many of the species in this group show patterns of increasing biomass.  The biomass time-series for both low-incidence bycatch (Figure 2C) and non-bycatch (Figure 2D) species show very similar patterns of overall reduction in biomass throughout the period of observation.  With only a few notable exceptions(e.g. *Larimus fasciatus*, *Amusium papyraceum*) most species considered in these two final categories show little sign of increasing biomass over the observed period.  




* discuss the differences between bycatch species and species no present in bycatch
### Diversity Metric Trends
* Show over all behavior of the curves
* discuss seasonal variations

### P:D ratio
* Describe overall trends
* Highlight regional comparisons
* Highlight temporal variation

### W stats
* Describe results
* highlight regional differences
* describe temporal trends

### Breakpoint analysis
* Introduce table
* highlight the stong correspondence of all indicators to the breakpoint period corresponding to release from fishing

### GAM Models???



## Discussion

Paragraph based on Paragraph from p 355 last one first column Hondorp et al2010
