# Global fishery imports and Eutrophication: synergistic effects on community dynamics (temporary)
**K.M. Purcell**, J.K. Craig
Beaufort Laboratory.  
National Marine Fisheries Service.   
Beaufort, NC, USA.  
[kevin@kevin.purcell.com](mailto:kevin@kevin-purcell.com)

RH: Fish imports eutrophication effects community dynamics	

## Abstract 
(words target)



 
##Introduction: (5 paragraphs)
Paragraph One
Introduce some large theoretical frame work for ecosystem response to disturbance.  Not hysteresis but improvement or maturation something.  

Effort trends and the relationship with global shrimp imports!!!
As I write th results this paragraph is becoming increasingly important. 



Paragraph Two
There are three mechanisms driving disturbance within the northwestern Gulf of Mexico: eutrophication, commercial fishing harvest, especially shrimp trawling which has a significant impact on the demersal fish assemblages, and finally coastal marsh loss.  Two of these three primary disturbance mechanisms, eutrophication and harvest, have a disproportionately strong effect on the demersal fish community through coastal hypoxia and physical stress of harvest.  

Paragraph Three
Introduce community level effects of hypoxia and fishing, and introduce metrics used to calculate them in an evaluation framework.

Paragraph Four
Paragraph 5 (Questions)
The objective of this study was to evaluate spatial and temporal variation in community diversity metrics within the northwestern Gulf of Mexico.  The nwGOM is a highly disturbed environment experiencing eutrophication, intense patterns of harvest over the last 30 years.  










## Methods  
### Data Sets:  
The SEAMAP survey is a fishery-independent trawl and hydrographic survey that has been conducted semi-annually in the northwestern Gulf  (-88 to -97.3 longitutde and 3-100 m depth) since 1987.  Bottom environmental conditions (e.g., temperatures, salinity, dissolved oxygen, depth) are measured at point locations chosen based on a stratified random sampling design using a conductivity, temperature, depth profiler (CTD).  

The Southeast Area Monitoring and Assessment Program (SEAMAP) survey is a hydrographic trawl survey which has been conducted in the northwestern Gulf of Mexico (Gulf) (-88 to -97.3 longitutde and 3-100 m depth) since 1982 and has operated in a standardized format since 1987 [@eldridge1988southeast].  The survey collects environmental (e.g., temperatures, salinity, dissolved oxygen, depth) and biological data (e.g., species presence, abundance) at point locations chosen based on a stratified random sampling design.  In the 31 years the SEAMAP survey has operated it has utilized 2261 unique taxonomic entities representing 747 genus and 1341 species.  To more manageably examine the diversity and dynamics of this marine community we evaluated a list of 60 species and 4 genus which represent ~90% of the total sampled biomass over 25 years (1987-2011) of the SEAMAP survey.  To avoid the systematic size bias derived from a biomass metric our list was created by examining the cumulative biomass contributions of all 2261 entities divided into three primary categories: pelagic, demersal and invertebrates.  From each of these three lists approximately 20 species were chosen from each representing 88% of demersal, 95% of pelagic and 97% of invertebrate sampled biomass.  By dividing the full list of taxonomically identified entities into these three categories and choosing representatives from each category we assured that our composite list of 4 genus and 60 species  was representative of both the overall environment sampled and the entirety of the biomass sampled by the SEAMAP survey.  The 4 independent genus designations (*Cynoscion*, *Loligo*, *Squilla*, *Solenocera*) were included due to their contribution to overall biomass and their prominent role as troublesome identification categories.  We examined only data post-1987 because prior to 1987 SEAMAP samplings methodologies are inconsistent in sampling time of day.  Additionally, our analysis only considers data for the northwestern Gulf of Mexico (west of -88), due to our interest in the relative contribution of hypoxia and fishing pressure on community dynamics and because this is the region of the Gulf most often effected by coastal hypoxia (XXXX).  While the SEAMAP database includes abundance and taxonomic specifics, additional species specific habitat occupancy (ie., pelagic, demersal) data was derived from FishBase (http://fishbase.org) [@froese2010fishbase].  

To evaluate the relationship between community dynamics and the two primary offshore environmental disturbances (hypoxia, fishing pressure) within the northwestern Gulf region we employed data from both fishery-independent and dependent sources.  To quantify the effect of hypoxia we used data derived from the annual mid-summer shelf wide hydrographic survey cruise that has been conducted by Louisiana University Marine Consortium (LUMCON) since 1985.  A primary objective of the summer LUMCON cruise is to generate an estimate of the aerial extent of hypoxia in the northwestern Gulf during mid-summer (CITATION).  Fishing pressure, or more specifically, commercial shrimp trawling effort on the Louisiana and Texas coastal shelves were quantified using fishery landings data which are archived by the National Marine Fishery Service (NMFS) Galveston Laboratory, Texas.  This database is a fishery-dependent data set which is a summary of monthly landings and effort data for the Gulf of Mexico shrimp fishery.  Fishing effort data for the shrimp fishery is not measured directly but is estimated, based on non-random interviews conducted by NMFS port agents.  We utilized annual aggregated fishing effort along both the Louisiana and Texas shelves as a covariate and potential driver in the temporal dynamics of community dynamics.  

### Regression Analysis  
Our first effort was to examine the temporal dynamics in the annual estimates of both abundance and biomass of our 64 selected taxonomic groups and compare those dynamics to the two primary offshore environmental disturbances within the northwestern Gulf.  We used breakpoint analysis to identify important temporal changes along the 25 year time series used within this analysis.  Breakpoint analysis, employs piecewise regression, or "broken-stick", models to iteratively fit a series of regression models, and can be utilized to identify critical thresholds (CITS) or important change-points within a time series (XXXX).  Our analysis employed a single sharp-break linear regression approach, which identified an ideal breakpoint for each time series by iteratively fitting a series of regression models with possible breakpoints ranging from 1990-2010.  Optimal models were selected based on which model had the lowest mean square error (MSE) (XXXX).  

### Abundance Matrix:  
Abundance and biomass are clear markers of disturbance or regime change in most aquatic environments (CITATIONS).  However, due to the nature and environmental impacts of a traditional trawl fishery mean that not only are fishery target species effected but often much of the available demersal biomass is effected as well.  Bycatch within a Gulf trawl fishery is of growing concern, so much as to be mandated for examination by the Magnuson IMPORTANCE OF BYCATCH  

To evaluate annual patterns of abundance with respect to bycatch status we classified each of our 64 taxonomic entities according to the nature of their bycatch relationship within the Gulf shrimp trawl fishery.  A recent study of observer data for both the South Atlantic and the US Gulf of Mexico Penaeid shrimp fisheries (Scott-Denton et al. 2012 Marine Fisheries Review) used observer data from > 10000 individual tows and approximately ~5200 sea days to characterize bycatch within the fishery.  We classified each of our taxonomic groups into one of four bycatch categories (target, high, rare, never) based on the proportion of biomass that species or group contributed to total bycatch biomass within the study.  The three species (F. aztecus, L. setiferus, F. duorarum) which are primary targets of the shrimp fishery in the northwestern Gulf were identified as TARGET species, within the HIGH group were any taxonomic entities represented by ≥ 0.1 percent of total biomass in the study, groups with the RARE designation consisted of \*<\* 0.1 percent of the total biomass, and finally the NEVER category consisted of species which were part of our taxonomic entities but were absent from bycatch characterization samples in the study.  To visualize these relationships we utilized the mvtsplot R package (Peng 2008) to create a 4 panel matrix plot in which high abundance is represented by green and low abundance is red, each time series is color metrically independent, and each panel represents a different category of bycatch association.  

### Community metrics:  
Under the framework of ecosystem based management a number of studies have examined the correlation between metrics of community composition and a wide array of ecosystem disturbance regiems [@Fulton2005which; @rochet2010changes; @rice2000evaluating; Link citations etc].  We chose four univariate metrics of composition metrics to describe and examine patterns of temporal variation within the northwestern Gulf demersal nekton community.  We calculated a 25 year time series for Margalef's index (*D*), Pielou's eveness (*J*), and two of Hill's numbers *N1* and *N2* based on SEAMAP abundance data for our 64 taxonimc entities.  Using the methods outlined above we developed a broken-stick regression model for each community time series and determined a break point in the time series based on the lowest MSE.  

This needs more description and reverences to why they were used or published studies employing them on marine systems.




### Pelagic to Demersal Ratio:  
The proportion of pelagic relative to demersal biomass in fishery landings is considered a metric sensitive to eutrophication (Caddy 1993, de Leiva Moreno et al 2000, Hodorp et al. 2010).  Conceptually, the P:D ratio is derived from the differential response of fishery stocks to increased nutrients within a system (Caddy et al. 1998 via Hondorp).  More specifically in partially enclosed systems eutrophication will tend to degrade benthic habitat resulting in decreased demersal landings and elevated pelagic-demersal ratios (Hondorp et al 2010).  Previous studies have found positive correlations between P:D ratio and chlorophyll-a concentrations within systems in both in Europe and the Mediterranean (Caddy 2000, de Leiva Moreno et al 2000).  Additionally, a recent study by Hondorp et al (2010) examined landings composition and water quality data for 22 different ecosystems including estuaries, coastal seas, and semi-enclosed basins.  While Hondorp et al (2010) reported indications that fishery practices (gear) and management could affect patterns of landings composition, they found that systems with extensive eutrophication and hypoxia displayed high P:D ratios.  To evaluate the effect of annual hypoxia on community dynamics we examined temporal and spatial dynamics in P:D ratio within the northwestern Gulf.  Biomass data for the 64 sampled biomass time series were classified as either pelagic or demersal based on species specific habitat occupancy.  The annual P:D ratios were calculated as the quotient of the annual aggregated pelagic and demersal biomasses for all survey stations summed across both the Louisiana and Texas shelves.  We also calculated the P:D ratio as a shelfwide metric including all stations for the entire northwestern Gulf.  

### Abundance Biomass Comparison (ABC) curves:  
The application of Abundance Biomass Comparison (ABC) curves to the study of disturbance within an ecosystem has an established history within marine benthic systems [@warwick1986an]), especially with respect to pollution driven perturbations [@warwick1987detection;@warwick1994relearning].  ABC curves are a derivative of *k*-dominance curves [@lambshead1983detection via: @greenstreet1996fishing], the theoretical basis of which is derived from principles of intermediate disturbance hypothesis [@connell1978diversity] and r- and k-selection theory [@Pianka1970on] and has been previously reviewed (Warwick and Clarke 1994, Yemane et al. 2005).  Recently, the application of ABC cures analysis has been applied to the examination of fishing pressure and its impacts on fish assemblages (Bianchi et al 2001, Blanchard et al. 2004, DeMartini et al. 2008, Jouffre and Inejih 2005, Kaiser et al. 2000, @yemane2005exploring).  Specifically, ABC analysis involves the comparison of two superimposed *k*-dominance, or cumulative ranked, curves for both abundance and biomass within a system over a given time period (Clarke 1990).  The difference between the curves is calculated as the Warwick statistic (*W*) with negative values indicating a biomass curve that lies below the abundance curve, and represents relatively disturbed systems (Warwick 1986, @yemane2005exploring).  

In the northwestern Gulf fishing effort from the commercial shrimp fishery is widely distributed across both the Louisiana and Texas coastal shelves (Perhaps a supp figure).  To evaluate the impact of this effort on demersal fish assembledges we used SEAMAP survey data on both the abundance and biomass of our previously described 64 taxonomic groups and aggregated them spatially based on their location on either the Louisiana or Texas shelf.  The value of this spatial comparison lies in the difference between the perturbation mechanisms operating on the respective coastal shelves.  While fishing effort is a consistent feature across the two coastal shelves, hypoxia is predominately a condition found in Louisiana coastal waters with limited exceptions in the northern most waters of the Texas coastal shelf (Rabalais, Bianchi see SpatialEff_MS citations for the same statement).  Dominance curves were generated for each year of survey data (1987-2011) for both the Louisiana and Texas regions using the Dominance plot routines in the software package PRIMER v6 (Warwhick ??), and *W* statistics were derived from these curves for each year for the Louisiana and Texas shelves, repectively.  

## Results
### Review of biomass table descriptive stuff point to table 1
  
### Review of 4 panel graphic with abun biomass and our two driver, discuss break points  
Overall trends in biomass and abundance within our 64 taxonomic entities during the 27 years of data evaluated in this study showed their highest values early in the survey, 1992 for biomass (Figure 1A) and 1987 for abundance (Figure 1B), with the lowest time series values occurring in 2000 for both measures.  Both biomass and abundance display positive trends since 2000, with values in 2011 representing 75% and 56% of the highest recorded values for biomass and abundance, respectively.  In contrast, time series values for our two ecosystem drivers, fishing effort and hypoxia, show differing temporal patterns of variation with fishing effort showing decline and hypoxia showing an increase during the period of observation (1987-2011).  Fishing effort was highest in 1987 at a value of 2.4 x 10^5^ (days) and was relatively stable at values around 2.0 x 10^5^ (days) until 2000 when we begin to observe declining shrimping effort with a precipitous decline in 2003 that culminates in a minimum value of 6.0 x 10^4^ (days) in 2010, a ~75% reduction in fishing effort over 7 years (Figure 1C).  The area of hypoxia showed lower values early in the time series with the average trend stabilizing at approximately 160,000 km^2^ in 1993 and remaining relatively stable, but with considerable inter-annual variability throughout the rest of the time series.  
  
### Discuss mosaic plot and trends in biomass.  contrast the four catch types
To better understand to role of individual species or groups to the overall temporal variability of biomass within the northern Gulf we calculated a biomass time series for each of the 64 taxonomic entities considered in our study.  Individual time series were grouped into four groups reflecting their bycatch relationship within the Gulf shirmp fishery. Of the four groups observed fishery targets consisted of XX% of survey biomass, with bycatch (XX) rare bycatch () and non-bycatch ().???  Our comparison found that for the three target species *P. aztecus*, *P. setiferus*, and *P. duorarum* biomass values were low until 2003 (Figure 2A) at which point biomass values begin to increase for each of the three target species.  The time series for high-incidence bycatch species display an general pattern of decline with considerable inter-annual variability among the 16 taxonomic entities (Figure 2B).  The lowest biomass values for this group occur in the late 1990s until the early-2000s at which time many of the species in this group show increasing biomass.  The biomass time series for both low-incidence bycatch (Figure 2C) and non-bycatch (Figure 2D) species show very similar patterns of overall reduction in biomass throughout the period of observation.  With only a few notable exceptions(e.g. *Larimus fasciatus*, *Amusium papyraceum*) most species considered in these two final categories show little sign of increasing biomass over the observed period.  

### Diversity Metric Trends
Differences in the abundance and biomass of the taxonomic groups examined indicates the possibility of changes in community structure that could be resulting from changing environmental forces in the northern Gulf ecosystem.  We examined 4 metrics of community structure and diversity for both the Louisiana and Texas coastal shelf during the summer and fall seasons.  We observed an overall decrease for all metrics in each region and season combination during the examined time series (Figure 3).  The rate of decrease for each metric is greater post-2000 in all region season combinations with the exception of the Texas shelf during the fall months (9-12) where the decreasing trends seemd to begin earlier (1995-2000) (Figure 3D).  

Annual community metrics for the Louisiana shelf displayed contrasting patterns of temporal variation for during the early period of the time series (1987-1995).  Specifically, we observed increasing trends for metrics during the summer months on the Louisiana shelf, peaking ~1995 and begining to decline with abrubt declines between 2000-2004 (Figure 3A).  By contrast, the Louisiana shelf during the fall showed decreasing measures of community structure early in the survey (1987-1995) after which there was period of stability (1995-2000) following which we observe abrupt declines similar to that seen in the summer months (Figure 3B).  While community metrics for the Texas shelf did display an overall decrease during the observed time series, the magnitude of change was considerably smaller than observed for the Louisina shelf (Figure 3C,D).  In the summer months on the Texas shelf we observed a subtle pattern of increase for all metrics, with the possible exception of species richness which remained relatively stable (Figure 3C).  This increasing trend peaks in 2000 afterwhich they decline throughout the observed period (Figure 3C). During the fall months the Texas shelf displayed greater interannual variation for each metric and while there were increases in observed metrics during individual years, average trends showed only limited increases early in the time series and then the common pattern of decrease in the latter years (Figure 3D). Species richness, displayed a decreasing trend during the early portion of the time series (1987-2000) after which it stabilized, this was unique in comparson to all other region and season combinations (Figure 3D). 

### Breakpoint analysis
We used a breakpoint analysis to identify significant changes in the temporal patterns of 6 community metrics and 2 ecosystem drivers for the northwestern Gulf (Table 1).  All break point models were signicant and ranged in $\alpha$ value from 1995 to 2004 with *R^2^* values all exceeding 0.97 (range = 0.972-0.999).  The earliest break point values occurred on the Texas shelf during the Fall season (1995-2000), for all other region/season combinations break points were identified within a 4 year window (1999-2004) with 17 of the 18 indicators breaking on or after 2000 (Table 1).  

Both ecosystem drivers displayed broken stick shape curves that suggested the ability to fit two distinct linear models to each time series.  We conducted a piecewise regression analysis for both ecosystem drivers (fishing effort and hypoxia) and determined that fishery effort was best modeled with a single break point $\alpha$ = 2001 (*R^2^*=0.99, *F*=1.22e^4^, *p*=< 2.2e^-16^) while area of hypoxia was best modelled with an break point in 1996 (model stats).  Further, our ecosystem drivers were also modeled with piecewise regression and breakpoints for biomass and abundance were identified in 1999 (*R^2^*=0.99, *F*=846.8, *p*= <2.2e^-16^) and 2000 (*R^2^*=0.99, *F*=2833, *p*= <2.2e^-16^), respectively.  

### Pelagic to demersal biomass ratio
The ratio of pelagic to demersal biomass for the northwestern Gulf showed an overall decrease during the 25 year time series (Figure 4) with a high of 0.30 (1987) to a low value of 0.09 (2008). We observed a distinct seperation in P:D ratio values between regions, with Texas showing consistently higher P:D values (0.13-0.62) relative to Louisiana (0.04-0.24) and therefore greater proportions of pelagice biomass across the entire time series in the Texas region (Figure 4).  Inter-annual variability is greater overall on the Texas shelf (variance = 0.016) in comparison to P:D values for the Louisiana coast (variance = 0.003).  The average rate of change was similar between regions prior to 1994 after which time the Texas shelf shows a temporay increase (1995-2000) which was followed by an increased rate of decline.  The difference between regional P:D ratios shows a decreasing trend during the 25 year time period observed, with the differnce between regions in 2011 only ~10% of the greatest difference (0.50) in 1996 (Figure 4).  The greater similarity between the P:D time series for the northwestern Gulf and the Louisiana shelf reflects the dominance of the Louisiana shelf (62.4%) in the overall biomass for the entire survey.  
 
### ABC curves (*W*-statistics)
To further examine the effect of ecosystem disturbance on the northwestern Gulf community we calculated a *W*-statistic time series for both the Louisiana and Texas coastal shelves based on biomass and abundance values for our 64 taxonomic groups (Figure 5).  Over the entire 30 year time series the Louisiana shelf sustained a lower average *W* value (0.009) relative to the Texas shelf (0.050), indicating a higher level of disturbance with that region.  The range of *W* values was similar between the Louisiana (-0.109-0.259) and Texas (-0.116-0.294) shelves, however the relationship between abundance and biomass on the Louisiana shelf was negative 13 of the 30 years examined, while the Texas shelf displayed negative relationships in only 5 of thos 30 years (Figure 5). Additionally, 3^rd^ degree polynomial regression lines showed differening patterns of change early in the time series with Texas values declining while values on the Louisiana shelf were relatively stable (Figure 5, solid line).  This trend changed in the mid to late 1990s with both regions begining to show patterns of increase for both regions begining in the late 90s and increasing at comparable rates (Figure 5).  


## Discussion

Paragraph based on Paragraph from p 355 last one first column Hondorp et al2010
